#Abstract
Poggio Civitate is the location of an ancient Etruscan
settlement in present-day Tuscany which, in the Archaic period
(c.580-c.480 BC), was home to a monumental courtyard complex, its roof
adorned with a series of terracotta acroteria. These acroteria took the
form of seated and standing men and women, which form the basis of this
study, as well as fantastic and real animals. The question addressed
will be the appropriate identification of these figures, regarding which
there is currently no scholarly agreement. The matter is contentious
because of the uncertainty about the function of the Archaic Building
itself. This paper argues that the Archaic Building most likely
functioned as a domestic complex, based on an analysis of the plan of
the building and its relationship to the previous phase. It is then
argued that the arbitrary categories of "mortal" and "divine" often
applied to the acroteria are an anachronism and that the acroteria
should in fact be identified more broadly as status markers: symbols of
the wealth and power of the Archaic Building's elite occupants.


#Introduction

Poggio Civitate is located in northern inland Etruria, near to the River
Ombrone and the modern *comune* of Murlo, an hour's drive south of the
major city of Siena (see **Fig.1**). It is situated in a prominent,
highly visible position (Meyers 2003: 114) on the eastern portion of a
hilltop plateau bordering central Tuscany (Donati 2000: 324; Meyers
2003: 72). Occupied since the Iron Age, the site was first
monumentalized in the Orientalizing period (c.720-c.580 BC) (Haynes
2000: 115). After the Orientalizing Period complex was destroyed in the
late seventh century BC (Turfa & Steinmayer 2002: 3), Poggio Civitate
was rebuilt in the Archaic Period (Damgaard Andersen 1990: 79). It was
upon the Archaic Building that the rooftop acroteria considered in this
paper once stood.

